docs/index.md, before:

# Welcome to VISCompass

_A spoken version of this guide is [available here](https://viscompass.org/audioguide.m4a)_

Welcome to VISCompass - the free app that turns your smartphone into an audio-compass. It aims to empower visually impaired crew to helm a boat on a pre-set course or turn or tack it in moderate coastal sailing conditions under the guidance of a qualified sighted skipper.

VISCompass doesn’t replace any of the skipper’s safety responsibilities for the vessel and its crew, and he or she will normally set up the hardware on the boat and input the course information which VISCompass then helps the visually impaired crew to steer to. If the weather conditions are favourable, this introduction can also lead VI crew (with appropriate coaching and support) to more independent forms of helming, for example, steering to the wind and to the “feel” of the vessel. 
All of the instructions and functions below apply to VISCompass use on iPhone, some recently introduced features will be arriving in the Android phone app shortly. 

## Apple VoiceOver and Apple VoiceControl

VISCompass is now compatible with Apple’s well-established VoiceOver system. So if you turn this function on in your iPhone, Voice Over can help visually impaired crew to explore and understand the position and functions of the buttons on the VISCompass screen. VoiceOver can also read out this User Guide as an alternative to using the audio link above. When VoiceOver is activated, it changes the way the iphone receives instructions, in ways which will be familiar to visually impaired regular VO users – for example the way in which touching the screen first identifies and then activates buttons.  A sighted skipper unfamiliar with VoiceOver may therefore find adjusting VISCompass’ control buttons  (for example to change the desired target) confusing, and may therefore find that his / her initial familiarisation with the app easier with VoiceOver off, and “normal” touchscreen functioning restored at first.


Apple's newer VoiceControl system can also be used with VISCompass – preferably by users already familiar with the system and its command structure and vocabulary. This requires familiarisation, clarity and precision of speech by the user. Enabling this facility at sea in no way replaces the role of the sighted skipper who should be fully aware if its use is envisaged. 


## Walk Around VISCompass’ Functions

1. All the app’s functions are contained on one screen. At the top is the current compass heading of phone which is also (if it has been mounted on the centreline) the heading of the vessel measured in degrees true (VISCompass uses the phone’s inbuilt compass, not its GPS or gyro capabilities. Hence mobile cell coverage is unnecessary for VISCompass’ full functioning).
2. Next down the screen is the slide on/off switch. When switched on VISCompass displays and navigates in the direction of the phone/vessel at the moment of switch on. This target direction is the number displayed below the slider switch. Once set, the target can then be changed using the red minus and green plus buttons, enabling the VI crew to helm the vessel through a turn. The increment of target change achieved by each button press is half that of the chosen tolerance setting (described below).   
3. Next down, as soon as navigation is underway with VISCompass switched on, and the boat’s heading deviates from the target heading by more than a pre-set tolerance, a large coloured number and arrow appear. These indicate the off-course angle and its direction, (VoiceOver refers to these as “Correction”).  This information is communicated using earphones (described later) to the VI helmsman via audio beeps . Higher pitched “chicken” beeps require a correction turn to starboard, and lower pitched “ducks” say turn to port. The faster the beeps, the bigger the necessary correction. When the boat is being steered on course withing the tolerance heading, a reassuring quiet drumbeat signal or an audio readout of the boat’s compass heading (in degrees) is selectable.
4. At the bottom of the screen are the three user selectable settings- to enable/disable these two forms of on-course audio feedback; to vary the tolerance angle; and to change the speed of the app’s response.
5. A second function for experienced users is activated via a sideways slide of the target minus or plus sign. A finger slide of the minus sign further to the left immediately decreases the set target by 100 degrees - the typical tacking angle to port of a sailboat. This advanced function facilitates the skill of tacking upwind to be developed. Similarly sliding the green plus button on the right hand side of the target increases it by 100 degrees, facilitating a starboard tack. 

## Set VISCompass up on board

1. The phone (protected by a suitable case if conditions require it) must be mounted screen up facing forwards and aligned to the boat’s centre-line. It should be attached firmly to the vessel by Velcro, gaffer tape or a phone-mount close to the helming position and where the skipper can readily operate it but away from any large metallic objects (such as the ship’s compass) that could cause magnetic interference.
2. Standard wired earphones may need a cheap (say 1 meter) extension lead to be comfortable for the VI user at the helm. If the app is to be run over a prolonged period, a car-phone charge lead into the boat’s electrical supply is also useful. VISCompass overrides any sleep setting on the phone, so note that it carries on working (and thus using battery power) until the app is closed. Incoming calls/messages aren’t muted though, so setting them to voicemail is a good idea! 
3. Using VISCompass with Bluetooth wireless earbuds is convenient alternative and allows more flexibility of where the phone is mounted. Once accustomed to the app, some VIsailors prefer to listen with just one earphone in.

## VISCompass Status

VISCompass is still in development, and there are many further potential enhancements to its functionality which would broaden the sailing experience of visually impaired crew. For example, there is the potential of voice synthesized communication of other navigation data (such as boat and wind speed and direction) using data transmitted wirelessly from the vessel’s navigation instruments.

## Conditions of use

The VISCompass app was developed by IT professionals and sailors giving freely of their time. It is made available to the visually impaired sailing community worldwide free of charge. It may not be integrated into other software or hardware, rebranded, modified, or remarketed without the express consent of the developers.

## Need for a sighted companion

VISCompass does not in any way reduce or replace the skipper's responsibility for the safe conduct of the vessel in which the app is used. He / she should make the decision as to the appropriateness of the app's use in any given situation, and ensure it is thoroughly commissioned and monitored in use. The developers accept no liability whatsoever for accidents or incidents which take place on vessels on which VISCompass is in use.

## Feedback

The developers would welcome any feedback from users, and any contact with organisations or businesses in partnering with us – please do so via mail (at) willbridge.com

Commit message:

Updated with Will's new instructions, ready for review
I made some edits, specifically I changed the line instructing users to set the device type to "headphone" to say to set it to "speaker"

docs/index.md, after:

# Welcome to VISCompass

_A spoken version of this guide is [available here](https://viscompass.org/audioguide.m4a)_

Welcome to VISCompass - the free app that turns your smartphone into an audio-compass. It aims to empower visually impaired crew to helm a boat on a pre-set course or turn or tack it in moderate coastal sailing conditions under the guidance of a qualified sighted skipper.

VISCompass doesn’t replace any of the skipper’s safety responsibilities for the vessel and its crew, and he or she will normally set up the hardware on the boat and input the course information which VISCompass then helps the visually impaired crew to steer to. If the weather conditions are favourable, this introduction can also lead VI crew (with appropriate coaching and support) to more independent forms of helming, for example, steering to the wind and to the “feel” of the vessel. 
All of the instructions and functions below apply to VISCompass use on iPhone, some recently introduced features will be arriving in the Android phone app shortly. 

## Apple VoiceOver and Apple VoiceControl

Apple VoiceOver is a screen reader which been helping visually impaired people understand and interact with iPhone screen content for many years. With VoiceOver activated, VISCompass’ layout and controls are audio-described. This can be helpful for orientation, but VoiceOver should be deactivated when VISCompass is in use by a sighted skipper since the only audio output wanted from the phone is VISCompass’ helming feedback. Similarly, Apple’s more recent VoiceControl isn’t recommended for use at sea with VISCompass.

## Walk Around VISCompass’ Functions

1. All the app’s functions are contained on one screen. At the top is the current compass heading of phone which is also (if it has been mounted on the centreline) the heading of the vessel measured in degrees true (VISCompass uses the phone’s inbuilt compass, not its GPS or gyro capabilities. Hence mobile cell coverage is unnecessary for VISCompass’ full functioning).
2. Next down the screen is the slide on/off switch. When switched on VISCompass displays and navigates in the direction of the phone/vessel at the moment of switch on. This target direction is the number displayed below the slider switch. Once set, the target can then be changed using the red minus and green plus buttons, enabling the VI crew to helm the vessel through a turn. The increment of target change achieved by each button press is half that of the chosen tolerance setting (described below).   
3. Next down, as soon as navigation is underway with VISCompass switched on, and the boat’s heading deviates from the target heading by more than a pre-set tolerance, a large coloured number and arrow appear. These indicate the off-course angle and its direction, (VoiceOver refers to these as “Correction”).  This information is communicated using earphones (described later) to the VI helmsman via audio beeps . Higher pitched “chicken” beeps require a correction turn to starboard, and lower pitched “ducks” say turn to port. The faster the beeps, the bigger the necessary correction. When the boat is being steered on course withing the tolerance heading, a reassuring quiet drumbeat signal or an audio readout of the boat’s compass heading (in degrees) is selectable.
4. At the bottom of the screen are the three user selectable settings- to enable/disable these two forms of on-course audio feedback; to vary the tolerance angle; and to change the speed of the app’s response.
5. A second function for experienced users is activated via a sideways slide of the target minus or plus sign. A finger slide of the minus sign further to the left immediately decreases the set target by 100 degrees - the typical tacking angle to port of a sailboat. This advanced function facilitates the skill of tacking upwind to be developed. Similarly sliding the green plus button on the right hand side of the target increases it by 100 degrees, facilitating a starboard tack. 

## Set VISCompass up on board

1. The phone (protected by a suitable case if conditions require it) must be mounted screen up facing forwards and aligned to the boat’s centre-line. It should be attached firmly to the vessel by Velcro, gaffer tape or a phone-mount close to the helming position and where the skipper can readily operate it but away from any large metallic objects (such as the ship’s compass) that could cause magnetic interference.
2. Standard wired earphones may need a cheap (say 1 meter) extension lead to be comfortable for the VI user at the helm. If the app is to be run over a prolonged period, a car-phone charge lead into the boat’s electrical supply is also useful. VISCompass overrides any sleep setting on the phone, so note that it carries on working (and thus using battery power) until the app is closed. Incoming calls/messages aren’t muted though, so setting them to voicemail is a good idea! 
3. On a calm day VIScompass’ audio output can be simply transmitted by the speaker built into an IPhone if it is mounted close to the helm. A better solution is wireless transmission to a helmsman’s Bluetooth earbud, or a small portable/rechargeable  Bluetooth speaker at the helming position. Then the phone can be safely mounted, say, under the sprayhood. Practice Bluetooth pairing in advance.
4. Earbuds receive all an iPhone’s audio-outputs (so unless silenced they’ll interrupt VISCompass when calls come in!). However iPhones cleverly detect when Bluetoothed to a speaker, and only send it music sounds, not ringtones, but also not VISCompass beeps. Overcome this with the Settings adjustment described below.

## Settings for Bluetooth speaker use

1. Check VISCompass is not running on iPhone, nor any other sound or music outputting apps like Spotify. 
2. Switch on Bluetooth speaker and put it into Bluetooth pairing mode (which sometimes only runs for a little while)
3. Pair your phone with the speaker
  - Go to the iPhone’s “Settings” and select Bluetooth  
  - On the Bluetooth page check Bluetooth is switched on
  - If it isn’t already showing as “connected” touch the line showing your loudspeaker’s name (eg  “Sony SRS”) which should then show “connected”.
4. Touch the circled i on the same line which should open a new page with per-device settings
  - If a "device type" option is not shown, then you are done! Your speaker operates only as a speaker and will not play alerts.
  - If the "device type" option is available, touch that label, and on the page that opens up select “speaker” 
5. Open VISCompass on your iPhone and check that its drumbeat, duck and chicken noises now emerge from your portable speaker.

## VISCompass Status

VISCompass is still in development, and there are many further potential enhancements to its functionality which would broaden the sailing experience of visually impaired crew. For example, there is the potential of voice synthesized communication of other navigation data (such as boat and wind speed and direction) using data transmitted wirelessly from the vessel’s navigation instruments.

## Conditions of use

The VISCompass app was developed by IT professionals and sailors giving freely of their time. It is made available to the visually impaired sailing community worldwide free of charge. It may not be integrated into other software or hardware, rebranded, modified, or remarketed without the express consent of the developers.

## Need for a sighted companion

VISCompass does not in any way reduce or replace the skipper's responsibility for the safe conduct of the vessel in which the app is used. He / she should make the decision as to the appropriateness of the app's use in any given situation, and ensure it is thoroughly commissioned and monitored in use. The developers accept no liability whatsoever for accidents or incidents which take place on vessels on which VISCompass is in use.

## Feedback

The developers would welcome any feedback from users, and any contact with organisations or businesses in partnering with us – please do so via mail (at) willbridge.com
